sample: add memfault (sample, memfault SDK, BLE MDS) (#821)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf-bm: doc/nrf-bm/libraries/memfault.rst

Fault handler
   HardFault and other exception handlers used for coredump collection.
   This context is effectively exclusive.

The Memfault SDK protects shared data with :c:func:`memfault_lock` and :c:func:`memfault_unlock`.
On threaded |NCS| builds these map to a recursive ``k_mutex``.
On |BMshort| they map to an ``irq_lock()``-based critical section when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled.

Platform lock
***************

Enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option (default on |BMshort| Memfault builds) to use :file:`subsys/memfault/memfault_platform_lock_bm.c`.

This implementation:

* Disables interrupts for the duration of a Memfault critical section while the main loop holds the lock, preventing ISR re-entry into Memfault.
* Supports nested :c:func:`memfault_lock` calls, as required by the SDK.
* Replaces :file:`memfault_platform_lock.c` from the Memfault Zephyr port when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled (nrf-bm excludes that SDK source from the build so ``k_mutex`` is not required).

> Do **not** stub ``z_impl_k_mutex_lock()`` / ``z_impl_k_mutex_unlock()`` as no-ops in application code.

Reviewer: Should this (with the sentences below)  be a highlighted warning, or does it belong to the last bullet point above?

That removes all protection while leaving the SDK assuming locking is in place.

Disabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option falls back to the default Zephyr Memfault lock and requires a working ``k_mutex`` implementation.
This is not supported on typical |BMshort| configurations.

Usage rules
***********

The table below summarizes **where Memfault APIs should be called** and the reason for each rule.

.. list-table:: Memfault API usage on |BMshort|
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 18 54

   * - API / operation
     - Context
     - Why
   * - ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_ADD``, ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_SET_*``
     - ISR or main
     - Updates in-memory metric values only.

>        Protected by :c:func:`memfault_lock` when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled.

Reviewer: I think we should require that the memfault_lock is always safe, not only when the Kconfig is set. If Kconfig is not set, it is up to the user to ensure its implementation is safe. 
```suggestion
       Protected by :c:func:`memfault_lock`.
```

Choose the context based on **when the timed activity starts or stops**, because the SDK records time at the call.

**Do** call ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_TIMER_STOP()`` in the ISR when stopping measurement on an ISR event (such as a button press), so the elapsed time matches the user action.

**Do** call start/stop from the main loop when the timed activity is tied to main-loop logic (for example measuring time spent in a connection handler).

**Do not** defer start/stop from ISR to main only to keep Memfault out of the ISR.
That records the main-loop processing time instead of the event time.

**Do not** call ``memfault_metrics_heartbeat_debug_trigger()`` from the ISR.
Set a flag and trigger the heartbeat from the main loop instead:

.. code-block:: c

   /* ISR: stop timer and schedule serialization */
   MEMFAULT_METRIC_TIMER_STOP(button_elapsed_time_ms);
   memfault_heartbeat_pending = true;

   /* Main loop: serialize when safe */
   if (memfault_heartbeat_pending) {
       memfault_heartbeat_pending = false;
       memfault_metrics_heartbeat_debug_trigger();
   }

Prerequisites
*************

> * Memfault account, project key (CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY), and matching zephyr.elf per software_version are required before decoded data appears in Memfault.
> * :ref:`ble_mds_sample_getting_started_memfault` for step-by-step setup.

Reviewer: The second bullet point take care of the step above. 
```suggestion
* Memfault account, project key (CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY), and matching zephyr.elf per software_version are required before decoded data appears in Memfault.
See :ref:`ble_mds_sample_getting_started_memfault` for step-by-step setup.
```

* `nRF Cloud powered by Memfault`_ for NCS-wide context.

> On |BMshort|, chunks are often exported over Bluetooth LE using MDS (:ref:`lib_ble_service_mds`); the :ref:`ble_mds_sample` demonstrates gateway upload with `nRF Connect Device Manager`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On |BMshort|, chunks are often exported over Bluetooth LE using MDS (:ref:`lib_ble_service_mds`); the :ref:`ble_mds_sample` sample demonstrates gateway upload with `nRF Connect Device Manager`_.
```

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_COREDUMP_COLLECT_KERNEL_REGION` = ``n`` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_COREDUMP_COLLECT_TASKS_REGIONS` = ``n`` – No Zephyr kernel or task regions on bare metal.
* Optional: enable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BLE_MDS` to export over BLE — see :ref:`lib_ble_service_mds` for MDS-specific options.

Application-specific Memfault options that are not exposed through Kconfig can be set in :file:`memfault_platform_config.h` in the application tree.

Sample
******

The :ref:`ble_mds_sample` applies the rules on this page together with MDS export.

Implementation files
********************

* :file:`subsys/memfault/memfault_platform_lock_bm.c` – ``irq_lock()``-based :c:func:`memfault_lock` / :c:func:`memfault_unlock` implementation.
* :file:`subsys/memfault/Kconfig` – :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK`.

Dependencies
************

This integration depends on the Memfault firmware SDK and the |NCS| Memfault module (``nrf/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk``), pulled in when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT` Kconfig option is enabled.

API documentation
*****************

> TBD

Reviewer: TBD

.. _memfault_bm:

> Memfault on bare metal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memfault on Bare Metal
```

######################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

|BMshort| reuses the standard |NCS| Memfault SDK integration (device information, metrics, trace events, coredumps, and chunk export).

> There is no separate Memfault SDK fork for bare metal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no separate Memfault SDK fork for |BMshort|.
```

Applications typically use a **single main loop** plus **ISRs** (SoftDevice events, :ref:`lib_bm_timer` callbacks, GPIO, and similar).
Memfault APIs can therefore be invoked from more than one execution context even though there are no RTOS threads.

This page describes **when Memfault APIs may be called**, **what must be deferred to the main loop**, and **why**.

Execution contexts
******************

On |BMshort|, treat these as distinct callers of Memfault:

Main loop
   The cooperative idle loop of the application.
   Examples: ``ble_mds_process()``, periodic Memfault heartbeat timer processing, flushing deferred trace events.

ISR
   Interrupt handlers that can preempt the main loop.
   Examples: :ref:`lib_bm_buttons` debounce timer callbacks, :ref:`lib_bm_timer` expiry handlers, SoftDevice event handlers if Memfault is called directly from them.

Fault handler
   HardFault and other exception handlers used for coredump collection.
   This context is effectively exclusive.

The Memfault SDK protects shared data with :c:func:`memfault_lock` and :c:func:`memfault_unlock`.
On threaded |NCS| builds these map to a recursive ``k_mutex``.

> On |BMshort| they map to an ``irq_lock()``-based critical section when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On |BMshort| they map to an ``irq_lock()``-based critical section when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled.
```

Platform lock
***************

> Enable :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` (default on |BMshort| Memfault builds) to use :file:`subsys/memfault/memfault_platform_lock_bm.c`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option (default on |BMshort| Memfault builds) to use :file:`subsys/memfault/memfault_platform_lock_bm.c`.
```

This implementation:

* Disables interrupts for the duration of a Memfault critical section while the main loop holds the lock, preventing ISR re-entry into Memfault.
* Supports nested :c:func:`memfault_lock` calls, as required by the SDK.

> * Replaces :file:`memfault_platform_lock.c` from the Memfault Zephyr port when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` is enabled (nrf-bm excludes that SDK source from the build so ``k_mutex`` is not required).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Replaces :file:`memfault_platform_lock.c` from the Memfault Zephyr port when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled (nrf-bm excludes that SDK source from the build so ``k_mutex`` is not required).
```

Do **not** stub ``z_impl_k_mutex_lock()`` / ``z_impl_k_mutex_unlock()`` as no-ops in application code.
That removes all protection while leaving the SDK assuming locking is in place.

> Disabling :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` falls back to the default Zephyr Memfault lock and requires a working ``k_mutex`` implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Disabling the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option falls back to the default Zephyr Memfault lock and requires a working ``k_mutex`` implementation.
```

This is not supported on typical |BMshort| configurations.

Usage rules
***********

The table below summarizes **where Memfault APIs should be called** and the reason for each rule.

.. list-table:: Memfault API usage on |BMshort|
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 28 18 54

   * - API / operation
     - Context
     - Why
   * - ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_ADD``, ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_SET_*``
     - ISR or main
     - Updates in-memory metric values only.

>        Protected by :c:func:`memfault_lock` when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
       Protected by :c:func:`memfault_lock` when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option is enabled.
```

       Do **not** defer these from an ISR to the main loop if the interval must reflect an ISR event (for example a button press).
       Calling from the main loop is fine when the timed activity is defined in main-loop context.
   * - ``MEMFAULT_TRACE_EVENT*``
     - ISR or main
     - From ISR, the SDK stores a pending event and returns quickly.
       Call :c:func:`memfault_trace_event_try_flush_isr_event` from the main loop to serialize it.
   * - ``memfault_metrics_heartbeat_debug_trigger()``, ``memfault_metrics_heartbeat_collect()``
     - **Main loop only**
     - Serializes metrics into event storage.
       Concurrent serialization while the main loop reads storage (for example during MDS export) can corrupt data.
   * - ``memfault_log_trigger_collection()``
     - **Main loop only**
     - Same rationale as heartbeat serialization: writes to shared event storage.
   * - ``memfault_packetizer_*``, ``ble_mds_process()``
     - **Main loop only**
     - Reads and consumes serialized Memfault data for export.
   * - ``memfault_platform_metrics_timer_boot()`` custom timer callback
     - **Main loop only**

>      - |BMshort| uses :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM` with :ref:`lib_bm_timer` to wake periodically; the timer ISR sets a flag and the main loop invokes the callback (see the :ref:`ble_mds_sample`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     - |BMshort| uses the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM` Kconfig option with :ref:`lib_bm_timer` to wake periodically; the timer ISR sets a flag and the main loop invokes the callback (see the :ref:`ble_mds_sample`).
```

>      - |BMshort| uses the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM` Kconfig option with :ref:`lib_bm_timer` to wake periodically; the timer ISR sets a flag and the main loop invokes the callback (see the :ref:`ble_mds_sample`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - |BMshort| uses the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM` Kconfig option with the :ref:`lib_bm_timer` to wake periodically; the timer ISR sets a flag and the main loop invokes the callback (see the :ref:`ble_mds_sample`).
```

* only touches in-memory SDK state protected by :c:func:`memfault_lock`, or
* is explicitly designed for ISR use (trace events), or
* must capture a timestamp at ISR time (for example ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_TIMER_STOP`` on a button press).

Call from the main loop when that is where the event or timed activity occurs (for example starting a timer metric when entering a main-loop state).
Do **not** defer timer start/stop from ISR to main solely to avoid calling Memfault in the ISR; that shifts the timestamp and produces incorrect intervals.

Defer to the main loop when the operation:

* serializes data into event storage,
* reads or exports stored chunks, or
* performs non-trivial work that must not overlap with export.

Recommended main-loop pattern
=============================

When Memfault is used from ISRs, the main loop should regularly run at least:

.. code-block:: c

   memfault_metrics_timer_process();                 /* bm_timer-deferred heartbeat, if CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM */
   memfault_trace_event_try_flush_isr_event();       /* flush ISR-pended trace events */
   if (memfault_heartbeat_pending) {                /* application-specific deferral flag */

>        memfault_heartbeat_pending = false;

Reviewer: It is perhaps unclear from this where the variable is set to true. It is shown below so not sure how important it is here, but it could raise questions.

**Do not** defer start/stop from ISR to main only to keep Memfault out of the ISR.
That records the main-loop processing time instead of the event time.

**Do not** call ``memfault_metrics_heartbeat_debug_trigger()`` from the ISR.
Set a flag and trigger the heartbeat from the main loop instead:

.. code-block:: c

   /* ISR: stop timer and schedule serialization */
   MEMFAULT_METRIC_TIMER_STOP(button_elapsed_time_ms);
   memfault_heartbeat_pending = true;

   /* Main loop: serialize when safe */
   if (memfault_heartbeat_pending) {
       memfault_heartbeat_pending = false;
       memfault_metrics_heartbeat_debug_trigger();
   }

What happens if the rules are broken
====================================

Calling Memfault without proper locking or deferral can cause:

* **Corrupted event storage** when an ISR serializes a heartbeat while the main loop exports data through the packetizer or MDS.
* **Incorrect timer metrics** if ``MEMFAULT_METRIC_TIMER_START/STOP`` are deferred from ISR to main when the timestamp must reflect the ISR event.
* **Lost trace events** if :c:func:`memfault_trace_event_try_flush_isr_event` is not called from the main loop (only one ISR slot is buffered).

> * **Link failures** if the default ``k_mutex`` Memfault lock is used without ``CONFIG_MULTITHREADING`` and without :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Link failures** if the default ``k_mutex`` Memfault lock is used without ``CONFIG_MULTITHREADING`` and without the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option.
```

> * **Link failures** if the default ``k_mutex`` Memfault lock is used without ``CONFIG_MULTITHREADING`` and without the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option.

Reviewer: I think this can be removed. It should be quite clear already that the `CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option should be used.

Cloud prerequisites
*******************

> Before diagnostic data is useful in the Memfault web UI, set up the cloud side:

Reviewer: I find the start of the original text `Before diagnostic data is useful` a bit strange. Might be better wording than my suggestion. 
```suggestion
The following setup is required on the cloud side before using the Memfault service:
```

1. **nRF Cloud / Memfault account** — Register through the `nRF Cloud Memfault registration`_ page if you do not already have access.
   Memfault remote diagnostics are integrated with `nRF Cloud`_.
   See `nRF Cloud powered by Memfault`_ for the full |NCS| integration guide.

> 2. **Memfault project and project key** — `Create a Memfault project`_ and set :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` in the application to the project key.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. **Memfault project and project key** — `Create a Memfault project`_ and set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_NCS_PROJECT_KEY` Kconfig option in the application to the project key.
```

   Devices upload data to the project matching that key.

> 3. **Symbol file per firmware version** — For each ``software_version`` the device reports, upload the matching :file:`zephyr.elf` from the build directory to the `Memfault Dashboard`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Symbol file per firmware version** — For each ``software_version``, upload the matching :file:`zephyr.elf` from the build directory to the `Memfault Dashboard`_.
```

>    Without this, coredumps, trace event logs, and other symbolicated data cannot be decoded in the UI.

Reviewer: I find it better to describe what it does rather than what is not working if it is not done. 

```suggestion
 This is used to decode coredumps, trace event logs, and other symbolicated data.
```

> On |BMshort|, chunks are typically exported over Bluetooth LE using MDS (see :ref:`lib_ble_service_mds`) and `nRF Connect Device Manager`_ as the gateway, rather than over IP from the device itself.

Reviewer: Why mention IP here?
```suggestion
On |BMshort|, chunks are typically exported over Bluetooth LE using MDS (see :ref:`lib_ble_service_mds`).
The `nRF Connect Device Manager`_ mobile application can be used as a gateway to the Cloud.
```

The :ref:`ble_mds_sample` documents the end-to-end setup, including symbol upload and gateway testing.

Configuration
*************

> In addition to :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK`, typical |BMshort| Memfault applications enable:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK` Kconfig option, typical |BMshort| Memfault applications enable:
```

* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT` – Enable the Memfault SDK.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_METRICS_TIMER_CUSTOM` – Use :ref:`lib_bm_timer` to schedule periodic heartbeat wakeups; defer the heartbeat callback to the main loop instead of using a Zephyr ``k_work`` / ``k_timer`` in the default Memfault port.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_REBOOT_REASON_GET_BASIC` – Basic reboot-reason collection compatible with all |BMshort| board variants.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_COREDUMP_COLLECT_KERNEL_REGION` = ``n`` and :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT_COREDUMP_COLLECT_TASKS_REGIONS` = ``n`` – No Zephyr kernel or task regions on bare metal.
* :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BLE_MDS` – Export Memfault chunks over Bluetooth LE (optional).
  See :ref:`lib_ble_service_mds`.

Application-specific Memfault options that are not exposed through Kconfig can be set in :file:`memfault_platform_config.h` in the application tree.

Sample
******

> The :ref:`ble_mds_sample` demonstrates Memfault metrics, trace events, coredumps, and MDS export on |BMshort|, including the ISR deferral and main-loop processing described on this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :ref:`ble_mds_sample` sample demonstrates the use of Memfault metrics, trace events, coredumps, and MDS export on |BMshort|, including the ISR deferral and main-loop processing described on this page.
```

Implementation files
********************

* :file:`subsys/memfault/memfault_platform_lock_bm.c` – ``irq_lock()``-based :c:func:`memfault_lock` / :c:func:`memfault_unlock` implementation.
* :file:`subsys/memfault/Kconfig` – :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BM_MEMFAULT_LOCK`.

Dependencies
************

> This integration depends on the Memfault firmware SDK and the |NCS| Memfault module (``nrf/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk``), pulled in when :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT` is enabled.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This integration depends on the Memfault firmware SDK and the |NCS| Memfault module (``nrf/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk``), pulled in when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT` Kconfig option is enabled.
```

> This integration depends on the Memfault firmware SDK and the |NCS| Memfault module (``nrf/modules/memfault-firmware-sdk``), pulled in when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_MEMFAULT` Kconfig option is enabled.

Reviewer: Usually we have a API documentation section at the end. We should at least point to `api_ble_mds`, perhaps also the Memfault SDK API?
